>>LISA GARR: Hello and welcome.
I'm Lisa Garr.
Recently there have been some
very incredible discoveries
in science and very
compelling evidence
found in our Earth's history.
And it gives us reasons
to think differently
about ourselves and about
the origin of our species.
Joining me today
is Gregg Braden .
He's a "New York Times"
bestselling author.
And he's internationally
recognized
as a pioneer that bridges
science and spirituality.
Gregg is a computer geologist.
He was one of the first
technical operations
manager at Cisco Systems.
And today he's joining
us to help us understand
this critical time that we
are in in history right now.
He's the author of a book
called "Deep Truth," among many.
"Deep Truth" is about
igniting the memory
of our origin, history,
destiny, and fate.
>>GREGG BRADEN: Lisa, I
am so happy to be here
with you today.
>>LISA: Welcome.
>>BRADEN: Thank you.
It's taken us so a time
to get to this stage.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>BRADEN: And we
have so much that I'd
like to share with our
listeners today and with you.
>>LISA: So much.
>>BRADEN: New material
for you as well.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
So I'm very, very
eager to learn.
Very eager to get into this
topic with our listeners
so that they can learn as well.
What-- the title of
the book, "Deep Truth."
>>BRADEN: This is one
of the first things
that people ask me.
Where does the title
"Deep Truth" come from?
For some people, it's a
very presumptuous title.
And it actually
comes from a quote
from one of the
outstanding physicists
of the early and mid-20th
century, Niels Bohr,
in a conversation that he was
having with Albert Einstein.
The two of them were talking,
just like we are here.
And I often wonder
if even they knew
how profound the statements
that they were making
were in the moment that
they were sharing them.
>>LISA: Well, we get
to have those, too.
>>BRADEN: Well, in this case,
they were talking about truth,
the nature of scientific truths.
And the direct quote, what
Niels Bohr actually said,
was that "It is the
hallmark of any deep truth
that its negation is
also a deep truth."
>>LISA: So within a
deep truth, the hallmark
is the fact that there's
also another deep truth?
>>BRADEN: Well, in science.
This is all
pertaining to science.
Our scientific
view of the world,
the universe, our bodies,
is based upon principles
that we hold to be true.
And some of them have been
around for almost 300 years.
When new discoveries overturn
existing deep truths,
then the new discoveries
become the new deep truths.
So when the new discoveries
negate the existing truths,
they become the new deep truths.
>>LISA: That's perfect.
>>BRADEN: OK.
This is the good news.
And this is the reason
that I'm sharing--
so passionate about sharing
this material today,
because the fact of deep
truths being overturned
by new discoveries is precisely
where we find ourselves
in the world today.
>>LISA: And that's
what we're going
to be doing today,
is really getting
through some cutting-edge
material here
that are actually going to
shatter a lot of belief systems
that we learned in
school, that is currently
being taught in school.
This is cutting-edge
information.
And I want you to open
and expand your mind
during this conversation
because it's so worth it.
>>BRADEN: Well, they are, Lisa.
And for you and for our
viewers, what I've done
is I've put together
just a few images
to punctuate and highlight the
conversation that you and I are
having here.
I'd like to begin by saying
that the good news is
that new discoveries are
changing the way we've been led
to think of ourselves, our
relationship to the earth,
our relationship to one
another, where we come from,
how long we've been here,
how we solve our problems.
That's the good news.
The flipside is that there
is a reluctance-- and in,
some cases, a
resistance-- to share
this information in mainstream
circles, in mainstream media,
in mainstream documentaries,
in mainstream classrooms,
and the mainstream textbooks.
And I want to
emphasize that it's not
the teachers that
are so reluctant.
But there's a system
that we're working with.
And I'm not going to say it's
good, bad, right, or wrong.
It's a system that
served us very well
and gotten us to the
point we are now.
However, because we are
facing such great crises
in a little window
of time, we are
being asked to think
differently than we ever
have before to solve the crises.
We're going to talk
about those crises today.
If we attempt to
solve the crises
through the same thinking
that has led to the crises,
we know where that's
going to carry us.
So it's imperative that we
open our hearts and minds
to the new discovery.
Science-based discoveries.
And this isn't wishful thinking.
They aren't hypotheses.
These are proven, scientific,
peer-reviewed discoveries
published in the tech journals.
They're simply not being
shared in the mainstream.
This is what I'd
like to do today
and what the book, "Deep
Truth," is all about.
>>LISA: That's exactly.
You always know
you're onto something
good when you're breaking
through that window
there, which is great.
So yes, the
PowerPoint really does
help illustrate this
conversation because we don't
have images of this from our
background, our schooling,
and so forth.
Gregg has traveled to the
far ends of the Earth.
And you're going
to see very, very
special, exclusive
snapshots today of places
that he's been that he's
sharing with us exclusively here
today that are owned
by the Smithsonian.
Many of them are.
>>BRADEN: Some of them are.
>>LISA: And also by Gregg.
So I'm very, very grateful
for you bringing it
to us on this level.
So let's dive in.
>>BRADEN: Well, I'd
like to just begin
by saying it's not
our imagination.
If you're watching
this program today,
we're having this conversation,
it's no news to anyone
that this is no ordinary time
in the history of our world.
It's no ordinary time in the
history of our civilization.
Or regardless of what
nation you live in,
you know it's no ordinary time
in the history of your country.
Something very, very
different is happening now.
It's not our imagination.
The best minds of our
time are telling us
in very, very clear terms
that this generation right now
in these years, we are living
the greatest number of crises
ever to face a single
generation in humankind.
And each crisis in and of
itself, if left unchecked,
has the potential to
forever end the way of life
as we know it today.
>>LISA: And this
generation meaning
40 to 50 years or longer?
>>BRADEN: This
generation meaning
the-- from the mid-20th century
into the early 21st century
now.
The image that you're seeing
on your screen right now
is a special edition of the
journal "Scientific American."
It was released in
September of 2005--
so think all the
way back to 2005.
It was a very different world.
Many of the things
we're dealing with now,
like the economic crisis,
hadn't quite happened yet.
But it was during this time some
of the best minds of our time--
scientists, engineers,
philosophers,
social architects, political
leaders, spiritual leaders,
religious leaders.
They all came together and they
were asked a single question.
And the question was, what's up?
What's going on?
What is it that's so different
about our time right now?
Their answers were so profound
that the journal "Scientific
American" released a special
edition, September, 2005,
to bring the rest
of the world up
to speed with what it
is that had happened
among those great minds.
And the title, Lisa,
tells the whole story.
"Crossroads for
Planet Earth." this
is the scientific
community acknowledging
that we're in trouble.
>>LISA: This is when all the
global warming conversations
were igniting and so forth, yes.
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
They addressed global warming.
Certainly the potential
of an economic collapse.
Again, this was 2005.
>>LISA: Yeah, before
the housing crisis.
>>BRADEN: Diminishing resources.
Diminishing fresh water.
The lack of food in so
many parts of the world.
Population competing for so
many different resources.
All of these things.
So this was their attempt
to let the rest of the world
know that something was up.
Now, I've come to
appreciate the term crisis
because, for me, crisis now
means that it's not over yet.
We have time to do something.
If we were not still in a
crisis, it would be too late.
>>LISA: Great reframe.
Yes, absolutely.
>>BRADEN: So they were
identifying many of the crises
that we're facing now.
The things that
we've talked about.
We're going to talk about
them a little bit more.
But what it is
that's happening now,
what it is that makes our
time so very, very different,
is that we are experiencing
natural cycles of the Earth,
including climate change--that
we're going to talk about--
that are pushing
unsustainable ways of thinking
and unsustainable ways of
living to the very limits.
And if we look carefully,
Lisa, while for many people,
it looks like the world
is simply coming apart
at the seams-- if we
look really carefully,
the only things coming
apart are the ways of life
that are no longer sustainable
in the presence of a changing
world.
They have served us to the point
they got us where we are today.
So I'm not judging our past
as right, wrong, good or bad.
We're in a huge learning curve.
>>LISA: And it's brought
a lot of awareness about--
>>BRADEN: It has brought a
tremendous amount of awareness.
So the changes.
Now, this is where the
science and our most cherished
indigenous and
spiritual traditions
really come together.
Because the science is telling
us about cycles of time
that are bringing the changes.
But they've only recently
begun to understand those.
Our indigenous ancestors
have been telling us
for 5,000 years,
look out, generation
of the early 20th century,
right around the year 2012.
It's not the end of the world.
It's the end of a cycle of
time called a Great World Age.
And with that, you can expect
some big changes in your life.
And so this is what
I'd like to talk about.
>>LISA: Absolutely
>>BRADEN: Right
now, the changes.
People are asking,
what's different?
What causes the changes?
They're triggered by
Earth's location in space.
Earth is a very dynamic system.
We all know that it spins
to create night and day
and tilts for the seasons.
It does much more than that.
In space, it's the orbit,
the tilt, the angle,
the wobble of Earth
in space, and how
it changes our relationship
to the sun, the energy
that we receive from the sun,
from the center of our Milky
Way galaxy.
Now, our own science
through the ice cores
in Antarctica and the poles
have begun to confirm this.
And we're going to talk
about this in more detail.
Our own science now
is confirming it.
But our indigenous
ancestors knew this.
Somehow they knew this
without ice cores, and GPS,
and computers, and satellites.
>>LISA: Well, they've been
around for over 100 years.
I mean--
>>BRADEN: Well,
thousands of years.
And they knew because they
understood the cycles.
And this is one of the things
that Western traditions
are only beginning to grasp.
We have been led to think of
ourselves in a linear fashion.
That civilization
happened the one time
from primitive to advanced,
where we are today.
In very linear terms.
The rest of the world, in
the ancient traditions,
have traditionally thought of
our lives and our relationship
to the world in terms of cycles.
So the cycle that
we're living now.
They say, of course
the world's going
to change because
it always does.
When you reach the point
where you are in this cycle,
you will undergo the
end of a way of life.
Not the end of the world.
The end of a way of life
that's no longer sustainable.
>>LISA: That's no
longer working, yes.
>>BRADEN: It's like a
great reality check.
A cosmic reality check.
We get to see what
works and what doesn't.
The things that
don't work anymore?
Let's stop doing them.
And the things that work well?
Let's do a lot of them.
Let's discover what
those things are.
So our ancestors, somehow,
they understood these cycles.
And they described them
in many different ways.
Some of the ancestors lived
very close to the earth.
And they talked
about earth signs,
like the birth of
a white buffalo
on the plains of North America.
Or when the crops no longer
grew in their seasons.
>>LISA: They knew to
look out for those, yes.
>>BRADEN: Yeah.
But to a scientist, that
means nothing to a scientist
because it's not based
on anything factual.
>>LISA: It's not reproducible.
>>BRADEN: The Maya, however.
The ancient Maya thought much
the way that we do today.
They dealt with numbers.
And their numbers
were based on cycles
that were driven by rare
astronomical alignments
that we can confirm with
our computers today.
So we're drawn to the
Mayan way of thinking
and the Mayan calendar.
However, I just want to share
with our listeners, the image
you're seeing on your
screen right now,
many people use this to
represent the Mayan calendar.
There is no single artifact that
represents the Mayan calendar
and the many systems of
timekeeping that the Maya had.
What you're seeing
on your screen
is the Aztec calendar
that actually
is derived from elements
of the Mayan calendar.
>>LISA: So there's no one
set template, calendar?
>>BRADEN: There were so many--
>>LISA: Different.
>>BRADEN: --different cycles
that the Maya incorporated
into their
understandings of time.
It was more than just
boom, boom, boom.
>>LISA: Those are
some of the images
we're going to see later.
>>BRADEN: They are.
And when we look at the
image that we're seeing now,
what I'd like to call
to your attention--
you should be able to
see this on your screen--
are the four boxes that
I've highlighted in red.
From the Mayan perspective,
and in many of the Mesoamerican
traditions as well,
those four boxes
represent the four cycles
prior to this cycle.
So they say we've been
through these changes
at least four times in the past.
This is the value of
going into the past.
If we can understand what
our ancestors lived through,
and understand what
they did to deal
with the crises
in their time, it
may be able to help us in ours.
We could learn from
their mistakes.
And in that way, there's this
beautiful, beautiful continuity
of human experience.
From ancient?
Yes.
But obsolete?
No.
To the very present.
>>LISA: So these cycles.
>>BRADEN: So these are
four previous cycles
that we're looking at right now.
The glyphs within each box
represent how the cycles ended.
One ended with a great wind
that covered the earth.
One was the great fire
One was when ice
covered the earth.
One was when the ice melted,
water cover the earth.
The great flood.
>>LISA: So they're
all natural disasters.
>>BRADEN: Think about this.
Earth, air-- I mean, Earth, air.
>>LISA: Wind, fire.
>>BRADEN: Fire and water.
It's very interesting,
the four elements.
Where are we right now?
That's the big question.
Our cycle is staring us right
in the face on this screen.
It is the image of
the fifth glyph,
which simply means movement.
They can't tell us what
the movement means.
It could be a physical
movement of the Earth.
It could be a
movement of thinking.
A movement of belief.
A movement of consciousness,
which I tend to believe
is what's happening.
A change in the way of
movement, in the way
we think about our
relationship to the world.
>>LISA: This symbol
symbolizes movement?
>>BRADEN: Movement, yeah.
>>LISA: It symbolizes--
>>BRADEN: Aren't you glad
we're having this conversation?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>BRADEN: It's great.
>>LISA: Well, wait.
I see man.
I mean, I see a face.
>>BRADEN: This is the symbol,
the glyph, for movement.
>>LISA: But isn't it
interesting that it is a face.
>>BRADEN: It is.
>>LISA: And right
now because we're
exceeding our resources
with the population.
>>BRADEN: Precisely
what this is.
So what the Mayan tradition
tells us is our cycle,
it's not some nebulous time
of beginning and ending.
It's very precise.
Our cycle began with the
rare astronomical alignment
on August 11, 3114 BC.
So this is the biblical era.
That's interesting because
so many spiritual traditions
originated to deal--
help people deal
with the changes of
the cycle that they
were going through then.
Very similar to what
we're going through now.
So our cycle began
August 11, 3114 BC.
It ends precisely, Lisa,
1,872,000 days later.
That's a 5,125-year cycle.
1,872,000 days later it ends.
And that happens to be
precisely on the winter
solstice, December
21 of the year 2012.
>>LISA: 2012.
>>BRADEN: So they knew that
that solstice and that alignment
1,872,000 days later would bring
us to the close of this cycle.
That we would experience the
tilt, the angle, and the wobble
driving so many of the
changes, including climate,
how we grow our food, how we
share our resources, how we
deal with a population
of 7 billion.
Coming to terms
with these changes.
They knew that.
Somehow they knew that.
>>LISA: I just want to mention
that why that this is relevant
is all of the information
you've heard about 2012,
and all of the fantasy, like
movies that are being done
about the end of time and so
forth, even the magazine covers
that you've shown me.
This is about
debunking those myths.
This is about the facts.
This is about the
science behind that.
Those are stories for right now.
Let's talk about
what the facts are.
>>BRADEN: Well, I'll say it
to our viewers right now.
If you've seen those
images and the very
authoritative documentaries
that Lisa's referencing,
and some of the Hollywood films
that were for entertainment,
there is no scientific
evidence that anything bad
will happen on specifically
this date in our future.
Rather, it's about
a zone of time.
And we're already living
the changes of that zone.
We're living the
climate warming.
We're living the--
the ice is melting.
The sea levels are rising.
Multiple forest fires on
multiple continents raging out
of controls.
Disease with no medical cure.
Hundreds of millions
of people are dying.
Many war fronts.
And we also know there are a lot
of really good things happening
in this planet right now.
There's a new world
that is emerging
in the midst of the
chaos of the world that
is no longer sustainable.
And I think it's so
important just to say this.
Not one of the
indigenous traditions,
at least that I'm aware of,
has ever said specifically
that our world will end.
They've all said
we have a choice.
And the dark ending that's
the focus of the media
is one possibility.
There's another possibility
because we could just as easily
say this is the beginning of
a new cycle, the beginning
of a new world age.
But people like
to talk about ends
more than they do beginnings.
>>LISA: Exactly.
And because the
beginning has to do
with us unfolding our hearts.
>>BRADEN: I think so.
That's precisely where
we're going with this.
>>LISA: And it's not
as sexy in the media
to be talking about that, yes.
It is an inner journey
where we're going.
>>BRADEN: I think
you're right, Lisa.
And so what I'd
like to do, I'd like
to share with you, with
our viewers-- the science.
And science doesn't mean
it has to be technical.
Science just means
these are proven facts.
And I'm going to share them
in a very non-technical way.
I think our listeners
probably know
that there's a
history of our planet
that's locked in the
ice cores or in the ice
caps of the Earth.
Every year, a new layer
of ice is deposited.
It captures air bubbles
of the atmosphere--
dust, pollen grains.
And when it freezes over, it
creates a permanent layer.
There is what we could think of
as a virtual library of Earth's
history locked up in the poles.
In 1999, the
scientists of the Earth
got together from many
different countries,
many different
scientific disciplines.
And they agreed to preserve as
much of this data as they could
by drilling through the
deepest and the thickest part
of the ice in Antarctica.
But even the
scientists were amazed
at how much data was revealed.
Each year is represented
by one layer of ice.
They drilled through over
420,000 layers of ice.
420,000 years of the
history of this planet.
We now have to
compare with where
we are right now to
see if we are truly
living in an anomalous time.
And this is what I'd like
to share with our viewers.
If you've never
seen an ice core,
I want you to see what
the ice cores look like.
You should be seeing them
on your screen right now.
This is part of an ice library.
And from these
ancient cores, we can
discover ancient temperatures,
ancient sea levels,
how strong the energy
from the sun was,
how strong the magnetic field
of the Earth was, so much more.
So the first graph of data
derived from the ice cores.
You're looking at
it on your screen.
And it might look
a little technical.
But all I'd like for
you to see from this
is that, obviously,
cycles are present.
That's what we're
looking at here.
>>LISA: The up, down, up, down.
>>BRADEN: The present is on the
left-hand side of the screen.
450,000 years into the
past toward the right.
The upper two graphs are
two different ice cores
that actually track
one another in terms
of the ancient temperatures.
>>LISA: If you're
just a layman, you
could see there's
a pattern here.
There's a pattern.
>>BRADEN: Every 100,000 years
roughly, there's a warming,
and then followed
immediately by a cooling.
The graph on the bottom is
showing the ice thickness.
It's very intuitive.
The ice thickness collapses when
the temperatures get warmer.
So when Earth heats
up, the ice melts.
And when the temperatures
cool, then the ice
becomes thicker again.
>>LISA: It makes sense.
>>BRADEN: Yeah.
This is what we're
seeing from this graph.
Where we are is on the far left.
And it is obvious that we
are in an upward surge, where
we would expect the
climate to be warming.
So Lisa, as a geologist,
what I can say to you
is if Earth were
not experiencing
a little bit of warming
now, I'd be concerned
because I'd say
what's different now
than there has been for
the last 450,000 years?
>>LISA: Based on the cycles.
>>BRADEN: Yeah, based
on these cycles.
What is it that's different now?
This is probably the
most complex graph.
And it's one example
that I'd just
like to share with our viewers.
I'm going to highlight in red.
This is from the ice cores.
What we're seeing in red,
this is the intensity
of the sun reaching the earth.
Now, I was a kid, I used to
think it was always the same.
Summertime, it's hot.
Wintertime, it's cold.
I grew up in Missouri, in
the Midwestern gray skies
of Missouri.
As a geologist, what
I learned was nothing
could be further from the truth.
That there is a
tremendous variation.
So we see the first
arrow I'm bringing up.
This is present time.
This is today.
And you can see that we
are experiencing actually
a little spike in the energy.
There's a little intense spike.
A greater intensity of
energy from the sun today.
Now the next arrow.
This is 5,000 years ago.
This is one world age ago.
1,872,000 days ago, there
was another little spike.
Now, there's a
lot of other stuff
I'm not even talking about here.
But what I'd like to call
your attention to is this.
If you look at the
spike today, and you
look at where it was 5,000 years
ago, they're almost identical.
I'm going to clean this up
so we can see it even better.
Here it is.
Look at the top
of the green line.
We are experiencing almost the
same intense energy of the sun
today as we were then.
Now let's extend it back another
5,000 years, another world age
cycle, and we see that
10,000 years ago, it's
almost the same as well.
>>LISA: So why all the crisis?
Why all the--
>>BRADEN: Well,
because if we are not
accustomed to thinking
in terms of cycles.
When a scientist looks at 20
years, or 50 years, or 100,
or 500 years, and sees
temperatures warming,
they're alarmed.
They say something's wrong.
It's all about context, Lisa.
And I'm not saying that
everything that we have done
is wrong.
And I'm certain that
the carbon dioxide
we're throwing in the
atmosphere is contributing.
It definitely is contributing.
Is it the cause?
No, it cannot be.
Because we see these
cycles of warming
450,000 years in the past,
before we had the industry--
we believe.
I don't think we had
the industry then
that we have now, or the number
of people and the populations.
>>LISA: That's usually
the contributing factor
in everything I hear.
>>BRADEN: Yeah, it is.
So what we're seeing
now-- and this
is one example of
the kind of data
that comes from the ice cores.
And I'm just using
this as one example.
What I've done is
I pulled together,
in the interest of time, many
different parameters from
the last two world age cycles,
from the last two 5,000-year
cycles, averaging those together
so that we can really get
a handle-- are we
living a broken Earth?
Are we living something
anomalous today?
And this is going to tell
the answer right here.
The categories on the left.
The magnetic strength
of the Earth.
Global warming,
the temperatures.
What's happening with the polar
ice, is it melting or growing.
And the intensity
of the sun's energy.
Historically,
in the last two cycles
that we're talking about
that the Mayans
identified, historically
the magnetic fields
of the Earth have
been measured in
units called VADM.
Very technical.
We don't even have to
worry about what it means.
But they were
measured in numbers
that range from 5.5
to 10.5 on this scale.
Presently, we are
at 7.5, right--
>>LISA: Right in the middle.
>>BRADEN: --where I
would expect us to be.
It is not anomalous.
We are right where we should be
for where we are in the cycle
right now.
Global warming.
Historically, the planet
rises 1 to 2 degrees Celsius,
depending on where you're
taking the measurements.
This is approximately
where we are right now.
We're averaging about 1
degree Celsius right now.
Polar ice always melts
during the cycles.
It's melting a lot
right now, that's true.
But we always expect it to melt.
It may be melting a little more
because we may have contributed
to the carbon dioxide
maybe a little more.
>>LISA: Right.
That's a fact.
>>BRADEN: The sun's
energy always spikes.
And as we saw, the sharp rise.
This is precisely
where we are right now.
>>LISA: So the bottom
line is that most people
are looking back 100, 200 years.
And that's what we're
seeing in the media.
>>BRADEN: Yes.
>>LISA: They're not
looking back 5,125 years.
>>BRADEN: Here's the thing.
Around 1880 is when consistent
records for the National
Weather Service began.
Many of the records are from
1880 until the year 2000.
Well, during that time
there has been a warming,
both of the ocean
and the atmosphere.
It looks alarming by itself.
When you look at that within the
context of a world age cycle,
it suddenly is not alarming.
It fits right into the patterns.
So it's about perspective.
>>LISA: And so those records
indeed did not exist back then.
However, we're learning that
from the polar ice caps.
>>BRADEN: Precisely.
So the bottom line for
me is I am less concerned
about the physical changes
here on planet Earth.
The parameters that
we're seeing now--
barring some unforeseen event,
like an asteroid hitting
the Earth, or a super flare
from the sun, or something
like that-- the conditions-- the
physical conditions that we're
experiencing now are what
our ancestors experienced
5,000 years ago at
the end of their cycle
and 5,000 years ago at the
end of the one previous.
I'm less concerned about
the physical changes, Lisa.
What I'm really
concerned about is us.
How do we treat one another
as we go through the changes?
How do we learn to work
together or to compete
as we go through the diminishing
resources of fresh water
and food as the
growing season changes,
and our ability to feed an
ever-growing population.
E.O. Wilson, a Harvard
biologist-- E.O. Wilson, very,
very well known in his field.
And I'd like to
share a quote that he
has made about precisely how
unique this time in history is.
So you know that
it's not a Greggism.
E.O. Wilson is saying--
this is a quote-- he says,
we're entering what he calls
a "bottleneck in time."
I love this imagery.
A bottleneck in time.
This narrow opening
"when our resources"--
so he's talking about
our emotional resources,
our psychological resources,
our physical resources--
"and our ability to solve
our problems will be pushed
to their limits."
And I cannot help but think
we are at the point where
we're reaching many
of those limits now.
Again, this was 2005
was when he said this.
I think if you're watching
this program, every one of you
is going through
stuff right now.
All of our lives
are being touched
by the economic collapse,
global economic collapse,
the disappearance of the ability
to grow and share food the way
we have in the
past, fresh water,
and changing in climate, how we
adapt to that climate change.
All of those things are touching
every one of our lives in ways
maybe that we're only
beginning to understand.
>>LISA: Haven't those
civilizations 5,000 years ago
had to deal with the same thing?
But they didn't
have the population.
>>BRADEN: Well, this is a very
good question that I've asked.
I've said, what is the
difference between us
now and then?
I mean, certainly
ancient civilizations,
they had to deal with--
>>LISA: How did they do it?
>>BRADEN: --diminishing
firewood or when
the crops weren't growing.
The answer is--
>>LISA: Famine.
>>BRADEN: Yes, they did.
But never has a
single generation
of such technical
sophistication been
faced with so many
different crises all
in the same window of time.
And the experts
are telling us we
must solve these
very, very quickly.
In some cases, with the
economy and with the prospect
of global war, we've got
about 12 to 18 months
to figure out how
to deal with this.
That's not long to
change the way we think.
And this is precisely
what we're being told, is
that we must think differently
than we've ever thought before
and change our thinking
quickly to meet
the demands the crises are
placing upon our world.
The beauty and the good news
is that we have good, sound,
scientific reasons to
change our thinking.
We don't have to
grasp at straws.
New discoveries that I'm going
to share in just a moment
are giving us very good
reasons to change the way
we have been led to think
of ourselves in the past
so that we may meet these
crises with new, life-affirming,
innovative solutions.
Not just to survive,
Lisa, but to transcend.
To become better people,
better communities.
To create a better world than
we had going into the crisis.
And that is why I'm so
passionate about what
we're doing.
And that's why I so
appreciate everything
you're doing to bring this
to a broader audience.
>>LISA: And your
information as well.
That is what needs
to happen right now.
And we're all feeling.
We're all affected by it
because we're losing our houses.
We're never going to see the
housing market the way it was.
It's definitely affecting
every single person
at the survivalistic
level, which
is why this information is so
important to consume right now.
>>BRADEN: It is.
The way we have thought
about ourselves in the past
is changing so
very, very quickly.
So it's obvious we are
living a time of extremes.
And we're being
told we must act.
My question is this-- how?
>>LISA: How.
>>BRADEN: How.
How are we supposed to act
so differently so quickly?
What we're really
asking is this--
how can we possibly
make the greatest
choices of our survival until
we understand the deepest
truths of our existence?
How can we make the
greatest choices of survival
until we understand the deepest
truths of our existence?
And many of those truths are
based upon false assumptions
of science that have
been perpetuated
for over a century, almost
a century and a half.
And this is where we're going
with all of this right now.
>>LISA: This is perfect timing.
And keep going.
>>BRADEN: It all comes
down to a very simple--
deceptively simple question.
And the question on
your screen right
now is simply this-- who am I?
Or there are many
of us together.
Who are we?
And the reason
this is important--
people say, what
does that have to do
with solving the big problems?
I'm going to invite
you to consider
that every challenge that's
ever crossed your path,
every problem that
you've ever had to solve,
every crisis that you ever
will or have experienced
in the past, the way you have
dealt with all of these things
all filters through
the lens of the way
you answer this simple question,
who are you or who are we.
Because the way we think of
ourselves, and our relationship
to this Earth, to our
bodies, and one another
is the filter through which
we will choose our answers
and create our solutions.
Precisely.
>>LISA: And that
, I will assert,
is going into the future
with your purpose,
with what you want to achieve
in your life, what you--
your goals, has everything to
do with how you answer this
question.
>>BRADEN: That's what this
whole series is about.
You are going to
have many guests--
you've had in the past,
and after I'm finished,
you'll have in the future--
many who are giving us new ways,
very good ways, and sound
ways, to think about ourselves
and our relationship--
>>LISA: Choices, yes.
>>BRADEN: --to the world.
They may not use
the same language,
but this is what
we're all doing.
>>LISA: It' all the
same information, yeah.
>>BRADEN: I realized
early in my life
as an engineer-- I was actually
working in the defense industry
during the last years
of the Cold War, Lisa.
A very frightening
time in the history
of the world behind the scenes,
when the world came unthinkably
close to doing the unthinkable
and unleashing nuclear weapons
on civilian populations.
And it was at that time that I
began to ask myself, who am I?
Who are we?
And I realized the
only way I would
find that answer
was to go to some
of the most isolated,
magnificent, remote, beautiful
places remaining on the Earth,
where that information is more
intact.
It hasn't been disturbed by
a modern way of thinking.
>>LISA: So you were a part
of building those systems,
and you had--
>>BRADEN: I worked in a
nuclear weapons program called
the Peacekeeper Missile during
the last years of the Cold--
the Peacekeeper Missile.
>>LISA: The name,
the Peacekeeper.
>>BRADEN: There's a
whole different program
we could do with that.
>>LISA: You had a whole,
complete awakening around that,
didn't you?
>>BRADEN: What I came
to understand is this--
and I'll just share
it with our listeners.
It's a story I share seldom.
But we're talking about it
here and I'm happy to do it.
It was a very frightening time
in the history of our world.
And I was asking
myself, of all people,
why am I working behind the
scenes on a weapons project
that I have such
emotions around?
And I asked myself
the question, what
would happen if we married
the wisdom of 5,000
years of human history-- what
we've learned in 5,000 years--
if we married that ancient
wisdom with the best
science of today.
What if we weaved those two
ways of knowing into a greater
understanding that would help
us prevent the kinds of wars
that I was in the process
of working in the industry
to support?
Where would that lead?
The answer to that.
If you're looking on
your screen right now,
you're seeing a collage of me.
Those are all of my images.
People have called
to my attention
that my search to
understand our relationship
to the world in these
traditions is actually
documented by the length of
my hair over the years, Lisa,
and by the color of my hair.
But my journey has
taken me into some
of the most amazing places.
Magnificent monasteries
in the Himalayas,
and humble mudbrick monasteries
in the mountains of Egypt,
and amazing temples
throughout Southeast Asia.
I've been in the libraries
where the wisdom of another time
is preserved.
And these books
in these libraries
are actually based
on another wisdom
from an even older time
that's been translated
into so many
different traditions
that I've had the
opportunity to see firsthand.
>>LISA: I just want the
listener to look at this.
This is incredible.
These are images from--
they no longer exist
because they were
taken down since then.
>>BRADEN: The libraries
have been dismantled.
And many of the texts
now have disappeared
into private libraries
and private collections.
That's true.
>>LISA: These have disappeared.
And now they exist
in maybe museums.
But you get to see these here.
And this is where
you physically went.
>>BRADEN: This is a
culmination of over 30 years
of searching for
the information.
These are the texts.
But then I've had
the opportunity
to live with the people who
practice what's in the texts.
To share meals.
To share the births of
their children coming
into this world and the
passing of their loved ones.
I've been with them when
they've left this world.
I've been with them through
revolutions in their countries,
where new governments came
into power during the time
that we were there.
And through all of these
experiences, very human
experiences, there's a
friendship, a camaraderie,
that develops.
And it's in the presence
of that camaraderie
that they are
comfortable sharing
this history, the libraries,
the teachings, and what
it has meant to them and
how they perpetuate it.
The sadhus of Nepal.
The Tantric masters
of Northern India.
I've spent a lot of time
with the indigenous elders
in the Andes of
Bolivia and Peru.
This beautiful shaman that
you see in the center--
>>LISA: How old is that lady?
>>BRADEN: That is a man.
And he is the shaman
that we spend time with.
And he is ageless.
>>LISA: Ageless.
>>GREGG: If you ask that man
how old he is, he will giggle.
>>LISA: Really?
>>BRADEN: That's the answer.
>>LISA: I mean,
you've said that you
are aware of these indigenous
people to reach 200 years old.
>>BRADEN: 1998, I was with
a woman in the Himalayas.
Her passport was dated 1888.
So that year she was 120 years
old and was vital, healthy.
Her color was good.
And I expect that she
still is living today.
And she is not the oldest.
They told me there are others.
But from my personal
experience, that's
the only one that I've seen.
I've been with the indigenous
women of the world, who
hold the feminine mysteries and
the secrets that seldom make it
into the Western traditions.
And the reason I'm sharing all
of this, all of this-- I mean,
every one of those is a
story unto themselves.
It could be the whole program.
>>LISA: It's easy
to get lost in that.
Yes, absolutely.
>>BRADEN: And we could do
some other programs on these.
But the point is
that our ancestors
and the indigenous
peoples of the world
make room for the
cycles of life, of time,
of history, of our relationship
to the Earth and climate.
They recognize the cycle,
so they know what to expect.
In the modern Western
way of thinking,
this is relatively
new way of thinking,
in terms of cycles,
because we have
been led to believe
that life, civilization,
human populations are
relatively linear.
We started primitive
a long time ago.
Boom.
One time to the pinnacle
of where we are today.
And now we know that
that simply is not true.
So for 5,000 years, our
indigenous ancestors
have answered the question
in their way, who are we?
For 300 years.
Now, science is a relatively new
way of thinking of our world.
It's only about 300 years old.
>>LISA: That is new.
>>BRADEN: Yeah.
Science has tried to
do the same thing.
And now what I'd like
to share with you today
is that there are a
number of key assumptions
that science is
based upon that now
that have been proven
false-- categorically,
absolutely,
scientifically false.
But I've chosen five in
the book "Deep Truth"
that I think are pivotal.
And we're going to zero in
on only a couple of them
today just to really
drive this point home.
But I'd like to briefly--
just five key assumptions.
Right now, when I was in
school, when you were in school,
our young people in school
are being taught today--
our listeners, you were probably
taught that evolution explains
life in general and it
explains human life.
Number two.
That civilization's right
around 5,000, 5,500 years old--
as we mentioned before,
it's happened once
from a primitive to a
sophisticated pinnacle
of civilization
that we have today.
>>LISA: Where we are now.
>>BRADEN: Number three is
that consciousness is somehow
separate from our
physical world.
And number four is that the
space between physical things
is somehow empty.
These two kind of work together.
>>LISA: The physics
concept, yes.
>>BRADEN: Physics.
There's a lot about
quantum physics.
Number five has another
Darwinian theory
along with number one.
That nature is based
upon a principle that
Darwin himself called
survival of the strongest.
It has later been interpreted
as survival of the fittest.
But his exact words were
survival of the strongest.
Now if you were taking
notes with this right now,
I'm going to make
this very easy.
At the top of this,
write the word false
because these are five
false assumptions.
Draw a circle.
Put a big line through it.
Every one of these is
absolutely, categorically,
scientifically proven to be
a false assumption right now.
>>LISA: And is being taught
in schools as we speak.
>>BRADEN: It's been taught
largely as a result of habit.
The textbooks for 100
years are printed.
The curricula are
established by state.
But yes, this is-- many
of our young people
now are being
steeped in the belief
that these are the principles
that our lives are based upon.
These false
assumptions, if you want
to know the consequences of
building a world in living
a life based on these
false assumptions,
you and I need look no further
than the world around us.
Because the things
that are collapsing
as unsustainable ways of
life are the things that
are based upon these
false assumptions.
The way we deal with climate
change, how we grow our food,
the way we share our food and
resources, the economic system,
the corporate systems.
All of these are based in
false assumptions of science.
They have all led, Lisa,
to the global extremes.
And for some people,
those global extremes
are too big to really even wrap
our hearts and minds around.
But they become
the human extremes.
>>LISA: They are
so extreme and they
become so impactful that
they are impacting all of us.
>>BRADEN: Well,
the human extremes
become personal extremes.
We are all touched
in one way or another
by what's happening in
the world around us.
I live in a remote area
of northern New Mexico.
People move there
because they want
to unplug and be away
from these crises.
And the crises are affecting
everyone everywhere,
the way we live
every single day.
>>LISA: In your home town?
>>BRADEN: Everywhere.
Everywhere.
What we're seeing is everywhere.
But the point that I'd
really like to share
is that for people who are
not aware of a framework
or a context, it looks like the
world is simply falling apart
at the seams.
My little mama, my
little 4'8" mom.
When she knows that I'm
going to come and do a talk,
she says, what are you
going to talk about.
And I tell her.
And she says, what can you say?
This is a quote from my mom.
She said the world's just
gone to hell in a handbasket.
And many people believe that.
But it's only the unsustainable
things that are collapsing.
That's it.
So when we understand
that framework--
this is why it's important.
So for our viewers,
now, I've put together--
this is a very simple
pyramid that tells us--
it answers the questions
you might be asking.
OK, why are those five
false assumptions important?
This is why they're important.
This pyramid of thinking--
These six areas of thinking
are a hierarchy of the way
we think of our relationship
to the world.
How we think subconsciously
or consciously
about the origin of life,
about where we come from.
About our relationship
to our body,
our relationship to the earth.
How long we've been here and
how we solve our problems.
These are all related.
The false assumptions
have led us
to believe that the origin
of life is absolutely random.
That human life is
absolutely random.
That we are separate and
powerless from our own bodies.
That we are somehow separate,
independent from the earth.
That what we do in one
place has no effect
on what we do somewhere else.
That civilization is a linear,
one way, one time happening.
That it began primitively.
It's evolved and advanced to
the point where it is today.
These are five key
false assumptions, Lisa.
And based on these
false assumptions,
we have been led to believe that
competition and conflict are
the way we solve our problems.
>>LISA: Struggle.
>>BRADEN: They have led--
struggle, precisely.
We've been led to think of life
in the world as a struggle.
And this is a Darwinian
way of thinking.
I'm going to share with you
and our listeners, our viewers,
precisely where that comes from.
This is why the way we
think is so important.
It is right here on this a
hierarchical relationship
of how we solve the
crises in our lives today.
So what I'd like
to do, I'm going
to zero in on two
that are related,
both from Charles Darwin.
And then talk about
where that takes us
and what it means to
us in our lives today.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
And I want you to
also think about how
this applies to your life.
Where this is
affecting you in terms
of your families, your
relationships, your raising
of your children, your health.
All of those things.
Just constantly be referring
back to yourself on this
because it is very relative.
>>BRADEN: And we can answer
some of these right now.
Because we've been led to
believe that nature is based
upon a model of survival of
the strongest and competition--
you think about this--
our lives and our world
are based upon that.
Corporate models are based
upon violent competition
with one another.
The idea is to win.
Young people in school are
less encouraged to achieve
excellence and more
encouraged to get it right
and to be the best.
>>LISA: Yes, the testing
has gotten all about that.
The schools have basically
formed everything
around the testing.
>>BRADEN: The economic
system of our world
that's collapsing as you
and I speak right now
is based on a false
model of competition.
So we know precisely
where these things lead.
Let's see where this comes from.
This is fascinating
if you've never
thought about this before.
Up until 1859, the ideas of
our relationship to nature
were largely left in
the realm, the purview,
of the church and
religious traditions.
It was in 1859 Charles
Darwin, as a scientist,
made the first
scientific attempt
to answer some of these deep
questions of our relationship
to the world.
Because he was a scientist,
and because he was the first,
the ideas were embraced quickly
by the scientific community
and by the world.
And they became
entrenched deeply
because he was the first.
They said because this is
science, it must be true.
>>LISA: That's why
he's so quoted.
>>BRADEN: Precisely.
I think most of our
viewers are probably
familiar with the title
of his first book.
The title on the cover,
the outside cover,
is "The Origin of Species By
Means of Natural Selection."
It sounds very technical.
The rest of the title
on the inner cover
gives us insight into
Darwin's way of thinking.
Here's the rest of the cover.
"Or The Preservation of
Favored Races in the Struggle
for Life."
Darwin believed that life was a
struggle based on observations
that he made in nature.
And he tried to apply what
he saw in some places,
to generalize and become the
rule, the law for all life
everywhere.
And in my opinion--
my opinion, this
is a Greggism-- this is
where Darwin went wrong.
I think he was a good scientist.
And I'm not down Darwin.
Darwin took the first stab
at answering the questions.
He expected his ideas
would be overturned
and he allowed for it.
It's just that
the traditions now
won't allow for
Darwin's ideas to fall.
You'll see that in his
writings in just a moment.
>>LISA: It was also based
on his reality at the time.
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
So in my opinion, the
mistake Darwin made was he
took some observations he
made for some forms of life
in some parts of
the world, and he
tried to generalize it
to all life everywhere,
including you and
me and human life.
So here's what I mean by that.
And I'm going to share with
you Darwin's exact words.
They're a little
flowery, but I want
you to see the actual
language that he used.
Now see if this
sounds scientific.
This is from
Darwin's work, where
he is suggesting that
all life emerges--
and this is his rationale--
emerges from a single cell
to become all life
that we see today.
This is a quote.
He says, "Therefore, I
should infer from analogy
that probably all the organic
beings which have ever
lived on this earth have
descended from some one
primordial form into which
life was first breathed."
>>LISA: So a scientist is
saying infer, probably.
>>BRADEN: He's saying infer
from analogy, probably.
If this were in
a textbook today,
it'd be laughed right
out of academia.
But this is the language
that he's using.
It's truly not
scientific language.
>>LISA: And then this was
taken as law in the universe
is even more interesting, yes.
>>BRADEN: Precisely.
So what he's doing
is he is saying
that he believes that all
life originated from simpler
forms evolved into more
and more complex forms.
Now, as a geologist
I can tell you
that the geologic
record actually
doesn't support that for humans.
I'm going to be very
clear about this.
Evolution is a fact.
And we do see it in the fossil
record for plants, for animals.
We do not see it for humans.
And this is where the
problem, I think, has arisen.
When we look at a
geologic map of time--
this is what you're seeing
on your screen right
now-- the most
recent is at the top,
the most ancient
is at the bottom.
About 545 million
years ago, it was
a time called the Cambrian era.
Something happened.
If you're familiar with
the Big Bang in physics,
when the universe began.
This is called the Big Bang of
Biology during this Cambrian
explosion 545 million years ago.
About 98% of all of the forms
of life that we see today
appeared within this relatively
small window of time.
That's not Darwinian, of
small incremental changes
over long periods of time.
This is life in general.
And I'm sharing with
you just a little graph
to give some idea
of how quickly--
>>LISA: Because this
is very relative
to the entire conversation
and the entire "Deep Truth."
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
So this is for life in general.
When it comes to us,
what does it mean for us?
Well, this is certainly not
Darwin's idea of evolution.
But when it comes to us, even
as recently as the fall of 2010,
a chart very similar
to what you're seeing
or exactly like you're
seeing on the screen right
now was being used to show
our relationship to what
are believed to be previous
forms of life that led up
to us being where we are today.
On the chart you're
seeing, we're at the top.
And we're connected
by a lot of thin lines
that I'm going to
highlight in blue
for our listeners, our
viewers right here.
I've just highlighted
these connections.
I'm highlighting
these because if you
look into the legend of this
and other graphs like this,
those blue lines are
not factual lines, Lisa.
What they say are they are
speculative relationships
or inferred relationships.
They are not factual
relationships.
And there's very little
evidence actually supporting
the fact that we are related
to these other forms of life.
It's fascinating to study them.
We learn a lot about our past.
And as a matter of fact,
the new DNA studies
now have proven scientifically
and categorically
that we're not related
to some forms of life
that we believe that we were.
>>LISA: So this is all assumed?
>>BRADEN: Inferred
or speculative.
>>LISA: Probably.
>>BRADEN: And
here's the problem.
If any other theories
are even mentioned
in the classroom
alongside Darwin's ideas,
teachers in the United
States are losing their jobs
for even mentioning the
fact that an alternative
or a competing
theory could exist.
Now, that's beginning to change.
But this is important
at any time.
It's especially important
now because as we're
trying to solve the greatest
crises of our existence,
how can we do that if we
have not embraced the deepest
truths of who we are in this
world and our relationship
to the world?
And this is one area.
This is only one area.
>>LISA: You are shattering
a lot of beliefs with this.
You are shattering what
we've been raised to believe,
what our kids are
currently being taught.
>>BRADEN: Some.
And I think for some
people, intuitively,
it's what they've
always believed within.
They may not have
agreed with what
was being taught in the schools.
But when it comes to us, the
search for the missing links,
the truth is the
missing link relating us
to those other forms is
actually still missing.
The belief is that modern
humans came from earlier forms.
When I was in school,
such as Neanderthal
was one that was very popular.
Cro-Magnon, which is now called
anatomically modern human.
But I want to share
with our viewers.
If you have not
heard of this, we now
know that we are not
descendants of Neanderthal.
And we know it because
the DNA does not
support the fact
that we could be.
In 1987, the body of a baby
Neanderthal girl, an infant,
was discovered underground
in a cave in northern Europe
in a rare state of
preservation, very rare.
She was carbon dated
to 30,000 years old.
So all of a sudden, we had a
30,000-year-old Neanderthal
infant that was at one time
believed to be our ancestor.
She was preserved so well.
Her hair, her skin, her DNA.
All of a sudden, we had her
DNA to compare it to ours.
Now, I'm just going to
cut to the bottom line,
the last sentence, from the very
prestigious journal, "Nature,"
that published in the year 2000.
Volume 404, page 490,
in the year 2000.
This is the conclusion.
Quote, "The results suggest that
modern human was not, in fact,
descended from Neanderthals."
And since that time, 40
more Neanderthal bodies
have been found.
And the DNA has supported
this conclusion.
So now we know who we're not.
We are not descended
from Neanderthal.
>>LISA: Why isn't
this more mainstream?
Why hasn't this turned
science on its head?
This was in 2000.
>>BRADEN: One of the
reasons, in all fairness,
it takes a long time
for new discoveries
to trickle down into what's
commonly accepted in the world.
That would be
important any time.
Right now, we're being told we
don't have decades to do this.
We've got to redefine our
relationship to the world.
And this is just
one small piece.
But we're going to go somewhere
with this very quickly.
But we know who we're not.
We're not descendants
from Neanderthals.
As a matter of fact, we walked
the Earth with Neanderthal.
If we shared the
Earth with them,
we could not have
descended from them.
That now is scientific
fact and we know that.
So here's another
graph on your screen.
We are in the center
at the very top.
And what we know is that the
form of modern human as we
are today, we appeared
relatively suddenly
about 200,000 years ago.
We used to be called Cro-Magnon.
And now we are called
anatomically modern human
because we are.
That describes us.
We haven't changed,
Lisa, in 200,000 years.
This is the thing.
If you take their skeleton
and put it next to you
and me, except for
thicker leg bones,
for all intents and
purposes we're the same.
That is not Darwinian evolution.
We don't know
where we came from.
But if we want to get
to the bottom of this,
we've got to understand what
happened 200,000 years ago.
I don't know the answer.
But I know that the
Darwinian theory of evolution
is not explaining it.
And the new theories are being
discouraged or, in some cases,
not even allowed to be shared.
So we have a whole
generation of young people
that want to dedicate
their lives to answering
the great questions
of our existence.
They're being required to do
so within a limited framework
of what we already know
as obsolete science.
>>LISA: So where are
we going with this?
I mean, we don't know
where we come from.
This is still the missing link.
It's still undetermined.
>>BRADEN: I think DNA is
going to tell the story.
>>LISA: Eventually.
>>BRADEN: Rather than a
family tree, my sense,
my Greggism sense,
is that we're not
going to have a family tree.
I think we have a family bush.
It's a very small
bush and we're it.
I think that we are
our own species.
>>LISA: Derived from where?
>>BRADEN: In the book I talk
about some of the DNA studies.
And what scientists are
saying-- geneticists publish
this in genetics journals-- are
saying that specifically human
chromosome number
two, that allows
us to be so much of
who we are, could not
have happened by natural
evolutionary processes.
That something happened to fuse
the genes in the way that they
are that cannot be
explained by natural terms.
They have to stop there.
They can't go any
further because they
don't know what else to say.
They're saying,
factually, it could not
have happened through
evolutionary processes.
And there's a lot more to this.
In the interest of time, we're
going through this quickly.
>>LISA: This is a whole, right,
subject within itself, yes.
>>BRADEN: But, here's
what Darwin said.
He expected his ideas
would be overturned.
He said, "If it
could be demonstrated
that any complex organ existed
which could not possibly
have been formed by
numerous, successive, slight
modifications," he
says, "my theory
would absolutely break down."
And we haven't even
talked about DNA yet.
DNA chain.
Darwin could not
possibly have known
in his time about the cells
and the DNA like we do in ours.
He expected his ideas
to be overturned.
And it's not being allowed in
mainstream media, academia,
classrooms, textbooks,
and teachings today.
>>LISA: It's not
being challenged.
It's being presented as fact.
As history.
>>BRADEN: And any alternative
or competing theories
that suggest something
else are not being allowed.
Now, I think that's
the problem, because we
have brilliant minds, beautiful
hearts of a whole generation
of young people, that are
about to be unleashed to answer
the deepest questions
of our existence.
>>LISA: That are asking.
>>BRADEN: And they're
being required
to do so within the limited
parameters of what we already
know is a false and
obsolete science.
>>LISA: That's why
this program exists.
>>BRADEN: Deep truth.
This is our first deep truth,
beyond any reasonable doubt.
Evolution doesn't
describe and explain
life itself or human life.
But this leads to the
second Darwinian concept
that I believe is
wreaking the greatest
havoc upon our lives
and our world today.
From your family dinner
tables to the collapse
of the global economic system,
I think it's based in this idea.
Darwin believed that when
he looked into nature,
and he saw the way
certain insects or animals
behaved in one location,
that he was looking
at small expressions in that
place of a greater law that
applied to every
life everywhere.
So for example, he said-- and
I love it when he does this.
He starts this
explanation by saying
it may not be logical
to think this way.
So even he's got a question
while he's saying it.
>>LISA: It's a qualifier.
>>BRADEN: This is a quote.
He says, "it may not
be a logical deduction.
But to my imagination,"
Darwin says,
"it's far more satisfactory
to look at these competing
instincts, such as young birds
ejecting their foster brothers
or sisters from the nest."
Two birds in the nest.
Another bird comes
that's different.
And they eject it
and leave it to die.
Or ants making slaves
out of other ants
because they are more
powerful and they can.
He says he is looking at these
"as small consequences of one
general law leading to the
advancement of all beings
everywhere.
That law is multiply, very,
let the strongest live,
and the weakest die."
Let the strongest live
and the weakest die.
This is such a
dangerous way to think.
And if you're wondering
how dangerous,
you look at the consequences
of this in the world around us.
Our corporate systems are
based upon the competition,
let the strongest live
and the weakest die.
The economic system that is
breaking and wreaking havoc
and causing suffering
throughout the world.
The way that we are dealing
with diminishing resources,
how we share them and
how we help one another,
all based upon these ideas.
We have just emerged
from the 20th century.
If you think about what we
were talking about here,
this was 1859.
The modern world is largely
based upon Darwinian ideas.
Some of the most
distorted and twisted acts
of atrocity of
human against human
occurred in the 20th century.
We don't even have to go
into what all they are.
Our listeners know
and our viewers know.
But many of them were
justified, they said,
because Darwin based
this in science,
it must be OK for us to treat
our fellow humans the way
that we're treating them.
Or in some cases,
exterminate them.
Let the strongest live
and the weakest die.
We're seeing the way we
deal with climate change.
We're seeing it as a
competitive battle that
must be won rather
than something that we
adapt to as a natural change.
>>LISA: And this was just a
small part of what Darwin said.
>>BRADEN: It is.
It's a small part.
But it became a very powerful,
dominant part of the teaching.
>>LISA: Of our culture.
>>BRADEN: And it is
deeply entrenched
into our world today.
And this is just part
of the deep truths.
Now the good news.
Let's go to the good news,
because there is good news.
>>LISA: Thank you.
>>BRADEN: The good news.
In the late 20th, now
early 20th century--
21st century, over 400
peer-reviewed studies
asked a single question--
what's the optimum amount
of competition in the
classroom, in the workplace,
on the playing field?
Violent competition, not a
friendly game of checkers.
All 400 studies came back
with the same answer.
Alfie Khan, in his book,
"No Contest-- The Case
Against Competition,"
described this.
This is a quote.
"The ideal amount
of competition in
any environment,
in the classroom,
in the workplace,
in the family, the
playing field, is none.
Competition always, always,
always is destructive."
That is followed by
a very prestigious--
an article in a very prestigious
journal, "New Scientist."
Michael Le Page,
this was in 2008.
This is a quote.
He said, "What we
see in the wild
is not every animal for itself."
That's very different than
what we've been led to believe.
>>LISA: Well, what
Darwin said, yeah.
>>BRADEN: He said, "Cooperation
is an incredibly successful
survival strategy.
In fact, when
cooperation breaks down,
the results can
become disastrous."
If you're wondering
where you can
see a good example
of cooperation,
you need look no further
than the body that
houses the soul that is
watching this program.
Because your body is made up
of over 50 trillion cells.
And those cells
must cooperatively
work together in a very precise
way to allow you your life.
And when that
cooperation breaks down,
the results are disastrous.
This is one of the
beautiful examples
in nature of where
cooperation is so vital.
>>LISA: That's true.
Our bodies always have an
innate ability to heal itself.
That is, it's always
attempting its highest order
to achieve coherence
within the body.
>>BRADEN: And we're just
touching the surface.
This is the tip of the iceberg.
But we're doing this,
Lisa, to get somewhere.
To share with our
viewers that not all
of the truths that we've
been led to believe
are actually truths.
And the science is
overturning them.
>>LISA: I mean, this might
be a psychology question,
but isn't the human psyche
hardwired for competition?
I know that-- Is it really
all based on this scientific--
>>BRADEN: We're
hardwired for excellence.
We want to do well.
And what you're going to see--
and this will take us into this
next section very quickly
because violent competition
among people, that we have
been led to believe is actually
fundamental in human
nature, interestingly,
we do not see the evidence of
it in the archaeological record
in the 5,000-year cycle
that proceeds this cycle.
It's only this 5,000-year
cycle where we see the evidence
of large scale war, the evidence
of weapons, mass graves,
mutilated bodies.
We see no evidence of that,
no walls around the cities,
no moats protecting the
cities, no evidence of weapons
prior to 5,000 years.
Although as you're
going to see, we
do see evidence of advanced
civilization in that time.
Scientific evidence.
>>LISA: That's fascinating.
So war, it did not exist back
in-- prior to the 5,125-year
cycle that we're ending.
>>BRADEN: One of two
things is happening.
Either we haven't
found the evidence yet,
which I have to say is
possible, although I doubt it
because so much
evidence is out there.
I'm not going to say
humans never fought.
But the large scale
war, defending--
>>LISA: The need for defense.
>>BRADEN: --huge armies.
Solving their problems with
a neighboring community
with huge armies
destroying one another,
we see no evidence of
that prior to 5,000 years.
>>LISA: And these are in these
civilizations we're going
to see the photos of--
>>BRADEN: We are.
>>LISA: --that are
currently even going
under archaeological digs.
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
So what we know now is nature
is based on cooperation, not
competition.
It's actually based on
what is called mutual aid
and cooperation,
not competition.
And I may not be doing
justice to the topic
because there's actually
much more to it than this.
But we're doing this is
at a very high level just
to introduce some new ideas.
This isn't a workshop.
This is--
>>LISA: I'm also very
curious because what Darwin
did say does exist
with the ants,
creating the armies and
slaves out of their own kind
and with the birds pushing
out the birds from the nest.
That does exist.
>>BRADEN: Competition happens
under specific instances.
But it is not the
overarching rule of nature.
And that's what the new
discoveries are showing.
>>LISA: So you're
about to show us that.
>>BRADEN: Yeah.
So now we're looking at
these false assumptions.
The second one is
that civilization
itself began about
5,000 years ago.
And people say, what's
the big deal about that?
Whether it began a million years
or 5,000 years, why do we care?
And it's important
because of the cycles.
If we are living this rare
pivotal moment in the cycle
now, and civilizations
and humans like you
and me have lived
through this in the past,
we can learn from them.
And it may give us
some insights into how
to deal with these crises
because they're rare.
We won't see this for
another 5,000 years,
the kinds of changes
were living now.
When I was in school.
Lisa, probably when
you were in school.
Our viewers, when
you were in school,
we talked about history,
you probably saw a graph.
Something like the one
you're seeing on your screen
right now that says
that civilization began
in the Mesopotamian
Valley, ancient Sumeria,
around 5,500 years ago.
And everything else is more
recent-- ancient Egypt,
the Indus Valley in
India, the area of India,
Greece, Rome all of that.
The problem with this is the
data no longer supports it,
but this is still what's
being taught in the classroom.
>>LISA: Well, when
you're learning
that, you don't know to
challenge that at that time.
>>BRADEN: No, but
I'd like to share.
This is one of those places
where this whole program could
be, and I would be very
excited to share, only
the archaeological discoveries.
Because there's
something about us
that's really drawn
to the ancient, Lisa.
There's a sense,
and I think there's
a yearning, and a longing,
to connect our lives today
with the continuity of something
that has come before us.
And that's why I think
this is so powerful.
So I'm just going to give
a couple of examples.
And there's much
more in the book.
Much more that we
actually could do.
>>LISA: This is exciting.
>>BRADEN: So 5,500 years.
I personally have had the
opportunity to document.
In northern Peru
right now, there's
an ongoing archaeological
site 150 acres,
five pyramids, two
circular plazas.
A mysterious advanced
civilization.
We don't know where
they came from.
When I was there, the dates
actually came in for this site.
This that you're looking at is
actually an aerial view of one
of these sites.
The site is called Caral, Peru.
The date came in.
And remember, we're
taught that civilization
began in a primitive
state 5,500 years ago.
This site collapsed when
we're told civilization began.
This advanced site is at least
7,000 years old and collapsed
2,000 years later
around 5,000 years ago.
It's now dated between 7,000
and 5,000 years before present.
This now is the oldest
site in all the Americas.
Older than the Inca, than
the Aztec, than the Maya.
>>LISA: This site in Peru.
>>BRADEN: In Peru.
And it's rewriting
the history books.
But it's only one site.
I'm just going to cut the
chase and go to the oldest site
everywhere.
>>LISA: Wait, wait.
I just have to ask.
You're there in Peru
when that data came in?
>>BRADEN: There's a whole
story I could share.
And how are we doing on time?
>>LISA: What did you do?
We have time.
Go for it.
>>BRADEN: The day that I
was here with our guide
in this very isolated,
remote, colorless land, where
the sky is the same
color as the earth,
is the same color as the
stone and the temples,
is the same color of the
plants that are still there.
They don't grow green.
They grow the
color of the earth.
The Caral Cactus.
He had cell coverage
for his cellphone.
And while we were there,
his cellphone rang.
And it was the laboratories that
had been independently dating--
three independent laboratories
dating organic material that
had come from deep
inside these remains.
And we knew that one of
two things would happen.
Either this would become
just another Incan site--
a very cool Incan site--
dated with everything else.
Or it would be the oldest
site in all the Americas.
And I saw he turned
his back to me.
And as he turned back around,
he had a huge smile on his face
and I knew what the
answer would be.
That was the day we
discovered that this
was dated between 5,000
years and 7,000 years BP,
Before Present.
Older than any of
these sites should be.
>>LISA: What did you do?
Did you sit down?
What did you do when you
found that information?
>>BRADEN: In all honesty--
>>LISA: Do you remember?
>>BRADEN: --I wasn't surprised.
I had a sense.
I actually felt
relieved because I
had a sense what
I was seeing here.
And the archaeologist
that I was talking to,
he wanted to tell me
what had been found.
I was frustrating him
with the questions
that I was asking that
he couldn't answer.
Who built it?
Where did they come from?
Where are the bodies?
Are there any weapons?
No walls fortifying this area.
Who were these people?
And he couldn't answer.
And he says, we don't know
the answer to those questions.
But there's a mathematics,
there's an architecture,
there's a way of agriculture.
Obviously, astronomical markers
very apparent that are here.
This was an advanced
civilization.
These people knew
things that we're only
beginning to understand.
And they helped to
understand the bridge.
When we see the Maya,
for example, and we say,
how did they do this?
Where did they come from?
Out of nowhere?
It wasn't out of nowhere.
They were bridged from
other civilizations
that we simply are not
aware of and are only now
are becoming aware of.
So this is the value of
going to a place like this.
The oldest site in the world.
Now, there may be
others that are older.
But this is the
oldest scientifically
dated, peer-reviewed
and accepted dated site
in the world now is in Turkey.
It's a place called
Gobekli Tepe, Turkey.
This is an amazing site.
It was rediscovered by a
German archaeologist in 2004.
It was discovered in the '60s
by an American archaeologist.
He didn't believe what he found.
He walked away from the
discovery of a lifetime.
>>LISA: You're kidding.
>>BRADEN: He didn't believe.
He said it can't be this old.
And he walked away from it.
>>LISA: He's kicking himself.
>>BRADEN: A German archaeologist
now is excavating this site.
They are underground sites, at
least 15 to 20 circular temples
have been seen in the
earth-imaging radar
underground.
Four or five now
have been excavated.
And of those four or five,
this is what we're looking at.
For some reason, this
site was intentionally
buried, Lisa, 8,000 years ago.
We don't know why.
It's older than 8,000 years.
But it was buried 8,000 years
ago and because of that,
everything was
preserved very well.
Look at the detail that
we're seeing on these glyphs,
on these temples.
>>LISA: So now when
an archaeologist
goes in and discovers
this, does he
maintain that and
bring in people?
How does that work, if
you don't mind me asking?
>>BRADEN: Well, the government
becomes very active in this.
>>LISA: Involved.
I see.
>>BRADEN: Usually an academic
institution is part of this.
It's peer reviewed, which
means that his findings,
other scientists
have to look at them
and see if he's made
a mistake somewhere.
Where we are with
this right now.
They haven't even gotten
to the oldest part of this.
But what they have
gotten to right now
is being dated between 11,300
and 11,500 years before today.
That's twice as old--
>>LISA: As we're taught.
>>BRADEN: --as what
you and I were taught.
What our young people
are being taught.
>>LISA: At school today.
>>BRADEN: However, it
also opens the door
to another possibility.
Let's go back.
Here is our map
that we just looked
at of what we've been taught
is the history of civilization,
5,000 years.
Let's plug in some
of these new dates.
Some of them we haven't
even talked about.
Here's Caral,
around 5,000 years.
Catalhoyuk we haven't
talked about, in Turkey.
Gobekli Tepe we did.
A site in India now,
9,500 years old.
But look at this.
The blue that you
see on your screen
is what scientists accept as
the end of the last ice age,
about 12,000 years ago.
When the ice age
ended, the weather
was unstable for
about 4,000 years.
They had a big storm.
A lot of rain.
Warming for 4,000
years that you're
seeing in the white on
your screen right now.
If we overlay 5,000 year
markers onto this map of time,
something very
interesting happens.
>>LISA: Like we've been
speaking about the cycles.
>>BRADEN: The dark lines
that we're seeing now.
We're saying we're at the last
years of a rare and mysterious
5,000-year cycle
that began 3114 BC.
There was another cycle before
that around 10,000 years ago.
The indigenous ancestors told
us there were four cycles.
If we go back four
cycles and we overlay
that right here, what we're
seeing is that the history
that we've been taught,
it's not the history
of the whole world forever.
It's the history of the most
recent cycle, the 5,000 years.
And there's another cycle
of 5,000 years where
these new sites are coming up.
So we're talking about
advanced civilizations
emerging from or very
near the ice age.
And this changes everything.
>>LISA: It does.
>>BRADEN: It changes everything.
Now, where this gets especially
interesting and relevant
to the Darwinian theories,
it's only in the most recent
5,000-year cycle that we have
evidence of large scale war,
violent competition
to solve our problems.
>>LISA: That is fascinating.
>>BRADEN: And our
indigenous ancestors tell us
that we are living what they
call the cycle of darkness,
the cycle of war.
The cycle before this
was a golden age.
And they say the
cycle that we are now
about to enter after 2012 could
be the next golden age if we
make the choices to
recognize and embrace
our relationship to the earth
and the deep truths of nature.
>>LISA: I just have to
say, coming from you,
and who you are, working in
defense and building weapons,
and a part of that, to
going on your journey--
>>BRADEN: It makes me cry
when I think about it.
>>LISA: Just looking at
this and your journey.
>>LISA: We must
embrace these deepest
truths of our existence.
In all honesty, I
think we sense them
in our hearts, which is
right where we're going.
We've been conditioned and led
to believe something very, very
different than what the facts
now are sharing with us.
So I think it's no
accident that only now,
when we are faced with the
greatest crises that threaten
our survival, that the
same science that tells us
about the crises is taking us
right back into our hearts.
And that's where I'd
like to go with this.
Do we have time
to do that today?
>>LISA: Absolutely.
It's the most important thing.
Yes.
>>BRADEN: So what we
can say now is this.
Is we know that civilization
is at least two times older
than traditionally acknowledged.
Here's why that
makes a difference.
The deep truths.
We go back to this pyramid.
If we think of the origin
of life as non-random
and the origin of human life
as non-random, and that we
are connected and linked to
our bodies as these studies
suggest.
A relationship to
the world is we're
connected and independent.
And civilization is cyclic.
Suddenly, competition and
conflict no longer makes sense.
It makes tremendous sense
to cooperate and create
what's called mutual aid.
The data supports it.
This is why the way we think
about ourselves is so vitally
important right now.
Our ancestors somehow knew
this, Lisa, long before we did.
They took these
one step further.
>>LISA: If you would think about
it, it is really common sense.
>>BRADEN: It is.
>>LISA: It really is.
>>BRADEN: Intuitively.
>>LISA: Yes, intuitively.
>>BRADEN: They carried these
truths one step further.
They said in the
darkest times of life,
together-- this is the
key-- working together,
we can tip the scales of
life in peace in our favor.
And that they told us
precisely how to do it.
What they said,
it's all about what
we call life's longest journey.
If you're looking on
your screen right now,
I think you probably know
what this journey is.
It's the journey that
averages 18 inches
from the center of our
logic-based mind right
into the core of that
beautiful heart that
is at the center of your being
as we share this with you
today.
The average 18
inches on each human.
>>LISA: Anyone who's ever made
the decision to volunteer,
to help weaker people.
Anyone who's ever been
a place of service
understands that journey.
>>BRADEN: I think so.
Our ancestors, this is
something they left us with.
But our own science
now is telling us why.
And if you have not heard this
as a viewer, this is important.
When you were in school
and I was in school,
we were taught the brain
is the master organ.
That the brain is
where the electrical
and the magnetic information
from our body's the strongest.
Electrical and
magnetic generators.
Now what we know
in the human body.
Now we know that the human heart
is the strongest generator.
That our heart is about 100
times stronger than the brain
electrically.
It's 5,000 times stronger
than the brain magnetically.
And this is important
because we live in a world
where we are influenced
by the magnetic
and the electrical
fields of this Earth.
So if we want to tip the scales
of emotion, and thinking,
and peace, and cooperation,
and balance in our favor,
it makes perfect
sense, Lisa, that we
would need to communicate
with the fields that connect
and sustain all life, and
use the one organ in our body
that's designed to do just that.
And it's not our brain.
It's our heart.
This is where some of the
most cherished traditions
of our past now overlap the
beauty of the best science
and the honest science
of today, if we're
really honest with where
the science is leading us.
>>LISA: And we're
learning that there are--
>>BRADEN: And we're learning.
So I've put together
just a little
section here I'd like to
share with our viewers.
And then lead us
through an experience
of exactly what this
heart connection is
all about in the
next few minutes.
Are you OK if we do that?
>>LISA: Absolutely.
And this is what I-- All
that we learned just now
is just a crash course
in going from our school
all the way up to now.
Let's bring this home now.
Let's bring this to where we
can use this in everyday life.
As I said earlier, in all
of your relationships--
in your relationship with
yourself, with your children,
with the people that you
work with, with your economy,
with our universe,
with our entire world--
this is how this
all comes together.
And it comes together with
the space of the heart.
>>BRADEN: Well, what
we've just encapsulated
in these brief few moments is
that it's not our imagination.
We are living in this rare
pivotal moment of crisis
where the outcome can create
a better life, a better
world than we had
going into the crisis.
We've been asked to
think differently
about ourselve to
solve the crises.
And I've just shared some
very good scientific reasons
to do just that.
Those reasons now lead us
back into a way of being,
as well as a way
of thinking, that's
centered in our hearts, that
allows us to tip those scales.
So I think it's probably no
secret to anyone watching this.
We are influenced by
the fields of the Earth.
The magnetic fields,
the solar fields.
We know on a full moon,
sometimes strange things happen
to people-- emergency
hospital room visits--
>>LISA: Increase.
>>BRADEN: --traffic accidents
increase, all those things.
So we know that the
fields influence us.
The new data now is that we
influence the fields around us.
It's a two-way conversation.
If we create the right
feeling in our heart,
that is the language that
influences the field.
And it took the tragedy
of September 11, 2001
to tell us that.
And I want to share
this with our viewers.
If you've ever seen these images
before, what you're seeing,
there are two satellites
over the Northern Hemisphere
of North America.
Every 30 minutes, they send
back a signal telling us
how strong the magnetic fields
of the Earth really are.
One's in red, one's in
blue on your screen.
Each square is a 24-hour day.
We have the ebb and the
flow, the ebb and the flow.
One day, scientists
saw a big spike
that I'm highlighting
in red right here.
And they said, what on earth?
What on earth is
causing this spike?
They went back and overlaid the
data, Lisa, on the map of time.
And what they found is
that spike began 9:00 AM
on September 11,
2001-- 15 minutes
after the first plane hit the
first tower of the World Trade
Center.
>>LISA: Before.
>>BRADEN: The thinking is this.
That it took about 15
minutes for the media
to carry the images of that
tragedy around the world.
And that that spike is the
result of millions or perhaps
billions of people in the
world simultaneously reacting,
heart-based emotions responding
to what they're seeing.
Some of them were anger.
Some were shock.
Some were disbelief.
Some were sadness.
But they were heart-based
emotions simultaneously
coupling with the
fields of the Earth that
were being measured by the
satellite 23,000 miles.
>>LISA: The satellite
measured these.
>>BRADEN: So these are
two satellites measuring
precisely the Earth's magnetic
field every 30 minutes,
and seeing the spike.
This was the tip-off
to scientists
that we're connected
to these fields in ways
that we're only
beginning to understand.
That tip-off led the
Institute of HeartMath,
the pioneering
research organization
in Northern
California, that I know
you will have in this
seat in a future program
to take us even
further than I'm going
to be able to take it right now.
>>LISA: It's so great.
Howard Martin's
going to be here.
>>BRADEN: Howard Martin.
He's a dear friend
and colleague.
We've traveled and toured
together many, many places.
And I'm very honored to be
sharing this project with him.
>>LISA: Perfect, yes.
>>BRADEN: The
Institute of HeartMath
was one of the first-- the
first, actually-- science-based
organization,
science-based initiative,
to take the information
that 2011-- September 11
taught us, that we
communicate with this field.
They created this
hypothesis that
strong, collective human emotion
has this measurable impact
on the very field of the Earth
that connects and sustains
all life.
Lisa, there is no
them and us when
it comes to the magnetic
field of the Earth.
Every blade of grass, every
hamster, every goldfish,
every CEO of every corporation,
every leader of every nation
is part of this field.
And people say, what can we
do to tip the scales of peace
and cooperation in our favor?
What we can do is we can
learn to feed, and nourish,
and nurture this field.
And you can do it
from your living room.
We're going to do it right now.
This is precisely.
>>LISA: And that is what
the oneness concept is.
When we're talking
about all being one,
this is encapsulated in
the geomagnetic field.
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
And the-- it all boils
down to an experience
that's called coherence.
If you like to see numbers,
this is precisely what
this is all about.
Every moment of
every day, there's
a signal between your
heart and your brain.
When that signal is optimum,
it is called optimum coherence.
It's very low
frequency-- 0.10 Hertz.
This is where healing
begins in our bodies.
Powerfully enhanced
immune systems.
Anti-aging hormones
kick in and make
us look vital and
young like we do today.
>>LISA: This is that
field in action, yes.
>>BRADEN: And it extends
beyond our bodies.
The effect extends
This is what allows
us to couple--
to literally couple with these
very powerful magnetic fields
that surround the Earth
and sustain all life.
To the degree that we can
feel the feelings that
create coherence,
we are communicating
with this larger field.
As we saw in 9/11, it was--
happened spontaneously.
The question is can
we do it intentionally
when we want to rather than
having a tragedy kick us
into the coherence experience.
>>LISA: Let me just
get this straight.
And actually, I want
to go through this
so that we could learn
what the frequency is
that we have in our bodies.
And then what the frequency is,
how that relates to the Earth.
And then we're going to do an
experiential exercise that's
going to tie all
of this together.
And we're going to do
that when we come back.
We'll be right back
with Gregg Braden.
Welcome back.
I'm Lisa Garr.
And this is Gregg Braden.
And we're in the middle of
an in depth conversation.
We're debunking some
of the false beliefs
and false assumptions
about the survival
of the strongest,
survival of the fittest.
And we're moving into the
conversation about coherence.
About a heart-based society.
About a world that
operates in resonance
and in the same frequency
as our heart and our mind.
So let's continue on
with this conversation.
>>BRADEN: Sure, Lisa.
Just before the break,
we identified the fact
that the human heart is
the strongest generator
of electrical and magnetic
fields in the human body.
It's much stronger
than the brain.
It's 100 times stronger
than the brain electrically.
5,000 times stronger than
the brain magnetically.
>>LISA: The heart is.
>>BRADEN: The heart is.
>>BRADEN: That's
important to us because we
know that this magnetic field
that was measured on September
11 that we just
saw in the graphs,
that that field
is directly linked
to the human hearts of
every person on this planet.
And what the spike in
the graph showed us,
spontaneously, the
spontaneous outpouring
of millions, or maybe billions,
of people in response to 9/11
showed that we have the
ability to actually strengthen
that magnetic field.
We saw the big spike.
Remember a couple
days right after 9/11,
how coherent this world was?
Do you remember that?
How everyone felt like-- it felt
like there was a family here.
>>LISA: Yes, it did.
At least in the US, because
that was my experience here.
>>BRADEN: I was in
Australia over 9/11.
And recently, not
long after that
in other parts of
the world, there
was for me an
unprecedented feeling
of family on our planet.
That is a beautiful
example of coherence
and what coherence can do.
>>LISA: There was.
There was.
And then there was
actions that happened
after that they
weren't so coherent.
>>BRADEN: Then we
left our coherence.
We went out of coherence.
>>LISA: Right, right.
Interesting.
So OK.
So the frequency.
So this outpouring
of-- it didn't even
have an emotion
attached to it it.
It wasn't happy.
It wasn't sad.
It wasn't love.
It wasn't fear.
It was just a frequency
that increased
in the Earth's resonance.
>>BRADEN: An honest
way to identify this--
>>LISA: Yeah, help me with this.
>>BRADEN: --is there were
many emotions attached.
So what happened was many
people witnessed these events
through the media.
It took about 15
minutes for the media
to carry it around the world.
>>LISA: It's how
powerful the media is.
>>BRADEN: Precisely.
>>LISA: It's interesting.
>>BRADEN: And I say, I was
in Australia during the time
and I saw it almost
instantaneously.
Everyone had a
heart-based emotion
that responded to
what they were seeing.
And it was spontaneous.
This is the key.
It was spontaneous.
It wasn't so much
a mental training.
It was a spontaneous
outpouring in response.
Like, oh my god, or the sadness,
or the hurt, or the anger,
or the confusion.
But the key is it was
based in the human heart.
And it was this spontaneous
and collective outpouring
of millions of human hearts,
the magnetic field of millions
of human hearts in the
same window of time
that we're seeing the
result of on this graph.
The satellites 22,000 miles.
>>LISA: Picked it up.
>>BRADEN: I believe
I said 23 before.
They're 22,000 miles above
the surface of the Earth.
The field was so--
strengthened so much
that those satellites
picked up that change.
And it told scientists--
This is the key.
It told scientists
for the first time
that we're not separate
from the Earth.
It gives new meaning
to the Gaia concept,
that we are part of
a living organism.
That we are not separate from.
That we are part of the Earth.
We typically go
around our daily lives
not really thinking
much about it,
and not creating spontaneous,
heart-based emotions.
This event tipped off
the scientific community
that it is possible.
And that spike happened as
the result of a tragedy.
The question that the Insitute
of HeartMath and others
began to ask, is
it possible for us
to strengthen this
magnetic field of the Earth
without having the tragedy?
Can we do it because
we choose to,
because we have
the wisdom to know
how to move into our
heart, how to create
that experience in our heart?
So you asked--
>>LISA: So is that
being measured today?
>>BRADEN: Yeah.
And people might ask, well,
why would you do that?
I'm just going to
tell a quick story.
It gives a beautiful example.
And I think it
might clarify this.
Are you OK if I do?
>>LISA: Please.
Yes, yes.
>>BRADEN: Not long after
September 11, I was in France.
And I was with a seminar,
about 3,500 people in a room.
And there was a man
in the audience.
He became very, very
angry about something.
Security immediately
escorted him out
and they were going
to make him leave.
And I believe there
are no accidents.
I said, please, just ask the man
to wait outside in the hallway.
We're going to do something.
And what I invited our
room of 3,500 people to do
was to create a field of
coherence in that room
just like we're going to do here
in just a couple of minutes.
I'm going to invite you
to follow Lisa and I as we
go through a coherent exercise.
I'm going to do that
exercise in here,
just like we did in the room.
So for about three
minutes, we created
this field of coherence.
Then I asked security to bring
the man back into the room.
He came back.
We gave him a microphone
and a translator
because my French
is not so good.
And I said, please, tell me
what you're experiencing.
And Lisa, it was
the strangest thing.
This man, he was
a very angry man.
He came and he had this
strange look on his face.
And I said through
the translator,
I said, can you tell me
what you're experiencing.
He said, it is very strange.
That's my French accent.
He said, in my mind, I can think
of the reasons why I'm angry,
he says, but I can't
feel the anger.
He says, I can't feel
the anger in here.
>>LISA: Really?
After you did this experience
that we're about to do.
>>BRADEN: He walked in--
we've all had this experience.
You're driving to church
on a Sunday morning.
You're listening to the
oldies on the radio.
You walk into church, there's
a whole different vibe.
That's a whole different,
whole different coherence
that's in there.
And you immediately, you
kind of meld into that vibe.
Well, this is the key.
The man could think of
the reasons to be angry.
He couldn't feel the anger.
What happened in that
room in France in that day
is possible for a planet
at a time of crisis.
It's very, very
hard for a leader
to declare war on
their neighbor when
they're not feeling that anger.
It's very, very hard
for nations that
have a common economic
interest to fight
one another over that interest
if they are not feeling it.
The flipside of this is
it feeds and nurtures
the possibility of
cooperation and peace.
We all have the opportunity
to nourish and feed
this field that encapsulates
the Earth by choosing
the language from our heart
that we share with that field.
When the language is optimum,
we call that language coherence,
optimum coherence.
It's a very low frequency
signal, 0.10 Hertz.
This is the language that
whales use in the ocean.
>>LISA: This is why
this is so important.
And this is what
this is all about
is that we-- This is so
very empowering, that we
as individuals, as
people of our planet,
can not only affect the entire
frequency of this planet,
but think of what we can
do in our own families,
in our own lives.
And how we can change
situations in the moment.
How powerful we really are.
>>BRADEN: Well, what
I'd like to emphasize
is for people that are hearing
this for the first time,
this is not about manipulation.
>>LISA: Please, no.
>>BRADEN: It's
not about control.
It is about recognizing that
we are part of this Earth
rather than separate from it.
And that there's a
field, a magnetic field,
that connects and sustains
all life that we're a part of.
And that we were born with
an organ in our bodies
that apparently is designed
to communicate precisely
with that field.
Not through words, but
through the quality
of emotion because
our hearts are
the strongest magnetic
field in our bodies.
If we're choosing to
communicate with this field,
to tip the scales of
peace in our favor,
to create an aura of
cooperation and mutual aid.
Or for our own bodies,
coherence is very, very healing
for our bodies.
It's where our immune
systems become much stronger.
Where the stress
hormones begin to-- We
have less stress
hormones, like cortisol,
for example, in the
presence of coherence.
Our anti-aging hormones,
as we mentioned earlier,
kick in in the presence
of this kind of coherence.
So coherence is a very,
very low frequency signal
that's generated in the heart.
And this, for me,
is just fascinating
because this is where the
wisdom of our indigenous
ancestors of over 5,000 years
meets the science of today.
Science is telling
us our heart is
this powerful, magnetic,
biomagnetic, bioelectrical
generator.
>>LISA: Science is saying that?
>>BRADEN: This is
what we're seeing.
But if you think about
the through line,
what brings all of the diverse
traditions of spiritual,
and religious, and indigenous
traditions together,
almost universally
what you'll find
is they're all asking
us one way or another
to move into our hearts.
That's the key.
And everyone learns differently.
That's the beauty of having
so many different traditions.
Everyone learns differently,
so everyone can relate to one
or-- you might not
relate to all them,
but they'll relate
to one or the other.
Some people don't
relate to science,
but they relate to the
indigenous traditions.
Some people reject that, but
they relate to the science.
It's all bringing us back to
our hearts, Lisa, at the time--
this is the context--- at
the time when our planet,
and our lives, and
our civilization are
at the greatest crises of 5,000
years of recorded history.
>>LISA: Needs it the most, yes.
>>BRADEN: I think
it's no accident
that it's happening that way.
>>LISA: Yes, absolutely.
And so there's other
words for heart.
If you don't resonate with
that word, it could be family.
It could be gratitude.
It could be caring.
It could be compassion.
It could be service.
>>BRADEN: Sure.
What scientists have found
in the English language
in the West, a few very
precise words actually
create this experience
in our bodies.
And they are the words of
appreciation, gratitude, care,
compassion, for example.
Those words trigger this
heart-based experience
of coherence.
And then that language
between our heart
and our brain, that's
when it's optimum.
So what I'd like to
do, I'd just like
to share-- we've now taken
this one step further.
And I say we because I'm
working with the institute
of HeartMath.
I'm not their employee.
I'm closely aligned
with them because we
have a common
passion to contribute
in every way we can
at this critical time,
this pivotal, precious,
precious moment.
>>LISA: That's
beautiful right there.
That's coherence in
action right there.
>>BRADEN: In the
history of our world,
we have this rare
opportunity, when
it looks like things
are falling apart,
to rebuild from a place
that's sustainable,
that is coherent,
that is compassionate.
And we're doing it right now.
So the Institute of
HeartMath created
the first science-based
initiative
to now use this scientifically
proven relationship
that we have to the
Earth to do just this.
To tip these scales of
peace and life in our favor.
The first science-based
initiative.
It's not a byproduct.
What I'm about to share
with you is the reason
that this organization
was created.
The Institute of
HeartMath created
what is called the Global
Coherence Initiative.
Personal coherence is
good for our bodies.
Global coherence is
good for the world.
On your screen, I'm going to
share with you the mission
statement.
This is the stated mission.
It is "to unite
millions of people
from varied beliefs and
cultures to shift consciousness
from instability and chaos
to balance and cooperation."
That is the reason
this technology
is being implemented
the way it is today.
>>LISA: An enormous amount.
>>BRADEN: Never has
this been done before.
Never has been attempted before.
So the Global
Coherence Initiative
is a two-phase initiative.
The first phase is building
a very unique kind of sensor
to listen in to these
magnetic fields of the Earth
to tell us about our
relationship to these fields
so that we know
when we're having
a positive effect on the fields.
Now here's why
this is important.
Always in the past,
Lisa, it's been
a spin-off or a byproduct
of a weather satellite,
or a military satellite, or
a communication satellite.
This is an independently
funded and created
project, privately
funded and created,
specifically to help us
understand our relationship
to the Earth and know when
we're being effective.
So the first phase.
If you'll look on your screen,
I want to share with you.
This is a technical-looking
blueprint of one
of these sensors looks like.
They are installed
into the ground.
And the next image
is how beautiful
these sensors can
be when they're
installed into the earth.
This is the first sensor.
>>LISA: This is
the actual sensor.
>>BRADEN: That is
actually located
in Boulder Creek, California
at the Institute of HeartMath
headquarters,
that's now measuring
the magnetic fields of the
Earth in ways that are unique,
and telling us information.
We're learning things
that we've never
known before about our
relationship to the Earth.
Every day, this-- Well,
this is the first sensor.
Now there are other sensors that
are sending back-- every day,
they're sending back data
that looks like this.
What you're seeing
on your screen
is a 24-hour section of data
from the left to the right.
Where you see the
bright areas is
where humans are most
active, in the daytime.
At night, it's where
there's less activity.
And the striations
that you're seeing,
these are levels of
frequency that you've
been asking me about.
The earth-resonant frequencies.
>>LISA: The earth-resonant
frequencies.
>>BRADEN: That you're
actually seeing here.
So this is one
day's worth of data.
There, right now, are a
number of different sites
that are installed.
There's one in Boulder
Creek, California.
One in New York.
One in the UK.
There is one now that is in--
>>LISA: New Zealand.
>>BRADEN: --is in Saudi Arabia
and one is in New Zealand.
These sites are
installed and they
are functioning
as it stands now.
The proposed site,
when we're finished,
we would like to have these
additional sensors to give us
better data.
>>LISA: Now, because
this is privately funded,
is there any-- is it
completely neutral in the way
that this information
is fed back?
There's no real reason
for it to be biased.
>>BRADEN: It's not biased.
Well, I'll say is that
other organizations are
very interested in the data
that's coming back because it
is independently-- it's
being created independently.
So these are the sites
that are in place.
This is what we would like
for the sites to look like,
or the network to look like
when the sites are finished.
That's phase one, is
designing the network
to tell us about our
relationship to the Earth.
Phase two is what
we're here about today,
is learning the
experience of coherence.
And for many people, it's
very intuitive, almost second
nature.
For other people,
they say wow, this
is unlike anything
I've ever done before.
But what I'd like to emphasize
is that this is not a religion.
>>LISA: It's nondenominational.
>>BRADEN: It is
nondenominational.
It doesn't have to replace any
practice that anyone is already
doing.
However, it helps us
to move into our hearts
while we're doing whatever
practice we're drawn to do.
And in that way, I think
it has tremendous appeal.
>>LISA: It will only add
to whatever you're doing.
>>BRADEN: A universal appeal.
So is this a good time, Lisa?
What I'd like to do is
lead our listeners maybe
through this experience.
Right now, there are members of
the Global Coherence Initiative
in 86 different countries.
You're seeing the countries
on your screen right now.
>>LISA: That is so great.
So this is a
worldwide initiative.
>>BRADEN: Who are working at
different times of the day
and night.
At some time, every 24-hour
day, someone out there
is feeding this coherence
into the fields of the earth.
Our goal is to have as many
people do this and the highest
quality of coherence
as is possible.
So these are people that
are trained to do this.
If you'd like to know more
about the Global Coherence
Initiative, I invite you
to go to glcoherence.org.
It's on your screen right now.
All the technical
papers are there.
All the sensor sites are there.
And what we're about to
do next is there as well.
You have a question?
>>LISA: No.
This is the opportunity
now is to feel and to make
an impact on this planet in
some way right now, right here,
watching this.
>>BRADEN: This moment.
>>LISA: You have this moment
right now to make an impact.
You have this moment.
Yes.
>>BRADEN: Well,
what the science is
telling us very clearly,
every moment of every day,
we're all feeding this field.
The question is what
are we feeding it.
If we're feeding
it a lot of fear
from the images of something
bad happening in 2012,
from the anger of what's
happening on Wall Street,
from the anger of
what's happening
in the global economic meltdown,
we know what that kind of fear
creates in the field.
It's an incoherent experience.
We have the opportunity
now from our living rooms--
this is the beauty, Lisa,
because every one of us
has a vote in terms
of what kind of energy
we feed into this field.
And we all collectively
benefit on a large scale
from what relatively
few people choose
to contribute on a small scale.
>>LISA: Yes, very true.
And living in fear is something
that we are constantly
fed through many sources, and
in the media and so forth.
And this is the opportunity to
have a vacation from that fear.
>>BRADEN: Absolutely.
So I'm going to
invite our listeners
to think back to
that French man.
In the room, he could
not feel the anger
in the presence
of that coherence.
And what I'd like to do--
something you'd like to say,
and then I'd like to
invite our listeners.
Let's feed the fields of
our Mother Earth right now.
Let's feed from our hearts.
And I will invite
you to follow me
through the steps of
creating coherence.
And you had something
that you wanted to--
>>LISA: Yes.
Absolutely.
I actually caught myself
because this is your opportunity
to take a vacation from
fear, but this is also
your opportunity to stay.
>>BRADEN: Redefine.
We redefine.
>>LISA: Yes.
To stay in that place of
coherence and see how it feels.
>>BRADEN: Yeah.
One of the things
I found in my time
with the traditional
and indigenous people
throughout the world is they
have the same problems moving
into their hearts that
we do in the West.
It's not automatic, apparently.
>>LISA: Really?
>>BRADEN: And for many people,
one of the first things
that happens when I ask them
to move into their hearts
is they think about
what it would be like
if they were in their
hearts, but they're still
in their mind.
So here is what many
indigenous traditions do,
is they simply touch
their heart center.
In this way, some people
in the Buddhist traditions,
they'll do it like this, but we
don't have to do it that way.
The physical sensation of
touching our heart center
automatically draws
your awareness
from your mind to the place
where you feel the sensation.
And that's why we're often
asked not to cross our legs
when we do this because
that's another sensation that
would draw our attention.
So there are three steps
to creating coherence.
I'm going to go through
them, and then we'll
have this experience together.
The first is moving
into our hearts.
The second is to
best of our ability
feeling the feelings that create
coherence-- appreciation, care,
gratitude, compassion.
The third is breathing
from that space.
Now what I'd like
to invite you to do
is so that you know that you
are part of a community that's
doing this right now.
The next image that
comes up on your screen
is also from the Global
Coherence Initiative.
It is the image of Earth.
And you should be seeing that
image on your screen right now.
The image of Earth
with some little lights
at different places
on the Earth.
Every place you see
one of those lights,
right now there are 21 people
throughout the Earth who
are logged on through the
Global Coherence site who
are creating coherence,
and feeding and nourishing
that coherence into
the field right now.
21 computers are logged on.
However, I know
some of these sites.
At each computer, there can be
hundreds of people in a room.
They have done this
in Japan, for example.
300 or 400 people in a
room with one computer.
>>LISA: And you of
course can do it
without being on
the computer, yeah.
>>BRADEN: You can do this.
You can go on when we
finish this program.
You can go on and
do this yourself.
I'm inviting you to join us now.
But the beauty of
this is it gives us
a real sense of community.
Real time, these
humans, your family,
your brothers and sisters,
my brothers and sisters.
And here we are in
Boulder, Colorado.
We should see ourselves
on there right now.
We are out doing
precisely the same thing.
So you should begin to
hear a little music coming
through your speakers now.
And that music is just
to shift the energy
a little bit from
what we're doing.
>>LISA: Music is the window
into the soul anyway.
>>BRADEN: It really is.
So I'll invite you
to uncross your legs.
And maybe take a
couple of deep breaths.
We've gone through
a lot of data,
a lot of left brain information.
We're going to shift gears.
A couple of deep breaths.
And I'm going to invite
you to move your awareness
from your mind into your hearts.
Simply touch your heart
center, if you will.
If it feels appropriate.
Breathe into that space.
And this is a very
active experience.
It's not about drifting, or
relaxing, or spacing out.
It is an active focus to keep
your awareness in your heart
center.
And now that you're
there, to the best
of your ability, if you will
feel what for you are feelings
of care, appreciation,
gratitude, compassion.
>>LISA: And notice
what you feel when
you feel those
feelings in your body.
If your body relaxes.
If your entire mind relaxes.
Just for a moment.
>>BRADEN: Care,
appreciation, gratitude.
>>LISA: Love.
>>BRADEN: And as you begin
to feel those feelings
in your heart, if you can
breathe as if your breath are
coming-- is coming from the
place of that sensation.
And this is one of
the simplest ways
to move into a high
stage of coherence.
And I'll give us
just a few seconds
to do this together in silence.
>>LISA: I am imagining so many
people doing this right now.
What a beautiful feeling.
>>BRADEN: As you feel
complete with that,
let's take one more, just
one more deep breath.
As if that breath were
coming from the place where
you feel the sensation
of your heart.
And if your eyes are
closed, you can gently
begin to open your eyes.
And the reason I wanted
to share this with you
today is because
coherence is that simple.
Now, there are other
techniques that go much deeper.
And you're going to have
another guest, Howard Martin,
from the Institute of
HeartMath that will take us
in other techniques
and much deeper.
But this is the essence.
Moving from our heart,
that is the strongest
biomagnetic generator
in the body.
Creating the communication
between our heart and our brain
through that feeling.
When you feel those feelings,
that's what sets up the link.
And we do that.
We couple to this
field of the Earth.
We're already one, and
we honor that oneness.
We honor that coupling
to a greater degree.
And in this way, we
nourish and nurture
the field that connects
and sustains all life.
This is how we tip the scales
of choice, peace, and balance
in our favor at a time of
crisis when we most need it.
>>LISA: The beauty of that,
Gregg, was how simple it was.
>>BRADEN: It is simple.
>>LISA: Yeah, it is so simple.
You can do that when
you're-- even open-eyed.
When you're driving.
When you're with a child.
Or if there's a chaotic
situation happening around you,
you can completely
ground yourself that way.
>>BRADEN: You can.
Well, if you're
driving, I want you
to focus on the road
in front of you.
>>LISA: Right.
>>BRADEN: But yeah, you can
drive from a coherent state.
Yeah.
>>LISA: No, I'm from LA.
I sit in traffic a lot.
So I mean just
the bottom line is
a chaotic situation
happening at work.
News coming in.
Anything that happens that takes
you out of that frequen-- you
yourself can get back
into that coherence
and it will affect
the people around you.
>>BRADEN: There are
groups of people now
that come together
on a nightly basis.
They gather with their
children around the TV,
watch the 6 o'clock news
the way it's reported.
They turn the news off.
They redefine what
they have just
been shown through the
presence of coherence,
and feed the coherence
back into the fields.
And the young people
respond to this
really well because all
of a sudden, the world
looks like it's
a world that will
support them and their choices.
And that they can contribute
in new and meaningful ways.
It's not a world that is
in-- that is falling apart,
that this is the end of
everything meaningful
as we've ever known it.
It's a rare, pivotal
moment of change.
You and I are living the
shift, the greatest shift,
in thinking, in power, in wealth
in 5,000 years of recorded
human history.
No one told us precisely
how to be to navigate this.
And we're learning as we
go through our ancestors
and the best
science of our time.
I want to thank all
of our listeners
for all you're doing to
contribute to a better world.
And Lisa, for your programming,
and for giving us a vehicle.
And for Gaiam for sharing
the opportunity so that we
can carry this very
life-affirming message
to the world.
>>LISA: Yes.
And this very
empowering message.
And this is the way that
people can make a difference,
connect to a greater whole,
and be a part of something
larger than just ourselves.
And that is so important.
>>BRADEN: And you can do
it from your living room.
>>LISA: Yes.
And thank you so much, Gregg.
You are such an
incredible being.
>>BRADEN: It was an honor
and a pleasure to be here.
>>LISA: It is my honor, my
pleasure for you to be here.
And I'm so grateful
for all the information
you shared with us, for
all of the belief systems
that you just shattered.
Thank you for that.
And just for being such
an incredible pioneer
in this entire field of bridging
science and spirituality.
Thank you.
>>BRADEN: It's good for
me to hear that today.
Thank you very much.
>>LISA: Thank you from the
place of coherence in my heart.
I am deeply honored.
>>BRADEN: You're welcome.
>>LISA: And thank you all
so much for listening.